we're here with Jim do genial he's the
author of the JFK assassination the
evidence today and the publisher of
Kennedy's and king.com
he's written a four-part article on the
Kennedys and civil rights in part three
Jim gets into the Kennedy's role in
tearing down Jim Crow so Jim why don't
you start you you talked us through the
Eisenhower years and how Eisenhower
basically didn't do anything so so what
did the kennedy find himself dealing
with the 1961 okay there's two big myths
that are very prevalent in the
mainstream media about JFK in civil
rights they are number one that Kennedy
waited okay to get involved with his
cause all right
and number two like Van Jones said the
Kennedys had to be educated about the
issue near those are true and all you
have to do is examine the record all
right and in fact what happened is that
on the very first day in other words
during his inauguration JFK was looking
at the parade and he said you know
something I don't see enough black faces
out there you know specifically in the
Coast Guard color guard and so that
night that night okay he calls up his
Treasury secretary and says I want to do
something about this this I see is a
problem with the Coast Guard there's not
enough people of color so why don't you
get me a report on that and then we'll
solve we'll find a way to solve the
problem now why is that important
because that was the beginning of the
term affirmative action see almost
nobody knows that that it was President
Kennedy who started that whole that
whole phrase affirmative action all
right now what do
mean by them okay human in its purest
sense that is we have to find people we
have to recruit people and they and it's
not like we're going to bend over
backwards you should let them in just
because you know they're a different
color we're going to find qualified
people they're out there but they don't
have the chance that Caucasian people do
have they don't have the opportunity
alright so and believe me this is
incredible the next year the Coast Guard
Academy sent certain representatives to
199 high schools throughout the United
States they interview they addressed
crowds that told eleven thousand people
and then they did interviews with 561 of
them and that's how he broke down that
whole you know
wall of segregation in the Coast Guard
Academy now this carried over to his
first cabinet meeting you know because
he put two and two together well it was
like that over there it's probably like
that over here too hey Scott and he said
and he said I want a report from each
department you know like justice
agriculture
all right the Treasury etc and I want to
know how many employees you have and how
many of them are african-american so the
next mean he got the results about give
you one example the Justice Department
had over 1700 lawyers 19 were black let
me say that again 1,700 lawyers
19 were black now is that terrible or is
that terrible I bet you figured out
that's less than one percent okay you
know and so that's when JFK began to
ride herd on these guys and said I want
you guys to start looking for people I
want you to find people because I'm
going to bring this up but every me
and I want to see some results all right
and then what he did is he assigned a
civil service officer to each department
to keep track of their progress and then
he signed another I signed another
officer to get them to recruit at places
like historically black colleges you're
like Texas Ani or Grambling unis places
like that and so year by year the
numbers went up all right now that
wasn't all see the United States
government is one of the biggest
contractors in America you know like the
State Department they need things like
pens pencils erasers briefcases etc
literally hundreds of them maybe
thousands sure course there's NASA you
know and then there's a the biggest one
of all probably the Pentagon all right
and so they have to contract out for
things like you know like for example
you you know they need a lot of uniforms
in the Pentagon and so they get the
textile you know they contract out the
textile company that we want 500 yards
of this and we want a thousand yards of
this etc and they go ahead and they give
it to a tailor and they make the
uniforms all right so Kennedy began to
ride herd on that also we are not going
to be dealing with any companies who are
segregated they're either going to
integrate or we're not going to do
business with them and this is by the
way this is this is how he began to
break the back of segregation in the
South because places like for example
North Carolina ok Virginia so those are
very big textile states because they
grow a lot of cotton okay and so for the
first time you now had african-american
workers working at different levels of
those textile companies and they
interviewed one guy they said what we
have to do this or we're going to lose
the conch
we're gonna go bankrupt all right so
that's another way he did it another way
he did and then he began to integrate
colleges in the south because that's
another place where they rely on federal
government contracts and grants in fact
it's the lifeblood of a lot of those
private universities all right and so
John F Kennedy he was the first guy who
who demanded changes in admissions
policies in other words it wasn't just a
people who were going to handle the
money once they hand it over he demanded
changes in the admissions policies you
know I want you guys you show me that
you're admitting people of color in this
company and this has been unheard of
okay in the south but places like Duke
you know a private college you know like
Duke and Rice University now began to
have to admit african-american people so
this was this was so big such a switch
from Eisenhower okay that it was really
you know kind of a uh you know God a
quantum leap forward because Eisenhower
not only did very little at Little Rock
he let those kids stand out there you
know with those hecklers and those
National Guard people for 22 days but he
also failed to join the n-double-a-cp
in the author and Lucy case that was a
case where the n-double-a-cp integrate
the University of Alabama in 1956 all
right Eisenhower did not back to court
order did not escort her to and from
classes did not send in the National
Guard when there began to be
demonstrated her be one right off the
campus and I'm not exaggerating very
much at all all right and so because of
that you know that kind of what
non-action they encourage these guys and
of course it made it harder for sanity
all right it encouraged these guys used
to
workers in this house to go ahead and
rail against the Brown versus Board
decision when James Eastland made a
speech quote you are not required to
obey any court which passes such a
ruling in fact you are obligated to defy
it about integration about integration
yeah integrating schools and colleges
all right and so see I think Eisenhower
did this because he did fairly well in
the South in a 1952 election and it even
better in the 1956 election all right so
it didn't matter to him
that you know Charles Houston and
Thurgood Marshall had closed in on
Plessy vs. Ferguson all right but and
you know in Brown versus Board when I
had and reversed that but the Supreme
Court in 1955 they restated the 1954
decision because they felt the South was
going to try and get around a decision
by essentially creating better separate
schools because the separate schools
they had before were pretty awful
they spent much less money on them and
the kids were so disappointed that they
they actually ride it in Virginia about
how bad is it so now they decided to
build better schools so they could be
actually try and say they were separate
but equal all right
so the Supreme Court said no no in 1985
we're not going to accept that we want
the schools to be integrated now since
Kennedy had been on record all right
with the Brown versus Board decision
right then he was not going to go ahead
and follow in what Eisenhower did and by
the way if you think the author and Lucy
case was back in 1956 there was a court
order to integrate black American
students at a high school in Texas
called Mansfield high that
governor called out to Texas Rangers to
stop the african-american kids don't
registering and I know he didn't do
anything I mean isn't that incredible
I mean he's actually letting the states
go ahead and localities overrule the
Supreme Court yeah now in bridge in
Virginia was really pretty bad because
that was led by Senator Harry Borg
Harry Byrd who had a very strong machine
in that state and the Richmond newspaper
featured a guy named James Kilpatrick
who made his whole reputation and career
denouncing the Brown versus Board
decision he was a close friend of
William F Buckley all right and so they
did everything they could all right in
order to go ahead and not obey Brown
versus Board they were even seriously
thinking of dropping the whole idea of
State Education and going ahead and
making every school into a private
school and excluding African American
kids and they actually did that in
Prince Edward County there were 1,800
after their African American students
who did not have schools to attend
because you know so what that what I
want I'm saying of course it is rather
than integrate they would rather see
those kids not even go to school at all
that's how bad it was all right and
Eisenhower encouraged that by saying
state can you believe a prezzie United
States saying this states were not
required to maintain a system of public
education and therefore the president
was powerless to take any action see one
of the things I've learned doing all the
research on this I've really changed my
mind about Dwight Eisenhower okay he
really was not a good the only way you
can say is a good president if you
compare him to somebody like Trump or
George HW Bush he was not a good
president okay
by any way shape or form all right well
when JFK comes in Bobby Kennedy and he
decide to death right off the bat okay
we are not going to back this decision
by the Prince Edward County's Board of
Supervisors Bobby Kennedy calls Prince
Edward quote a blight on Virginia and
disagrees to our educational system and
to our country now isn't that the test
is know what a president should be
saying or an attorney general all right
and Kennedy now began to remake the
Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals see I
think I'm the Fifth Circuit Court of
Appeals was a very good court for the
brown decision in the southern part of
the United States the deep south the
Fourth Circuit was not that good now has
that dealt with the upper South but JFK
began to remake the court when a couple
people stepped down and there was an act
to add judges I think in 60 or 61 add
judges just circuit courts and Kennedy
began to appoint guys who he thought
would be more than thinking in sync with
the way he thought that the Brown versus
Board this again should be interpreted
all right now now that took a while
though
all right in the meantime in the
meantime the White House does something
that to my knowledge and by the way see
in this all I mean this is night and day
between eyes narrow and Kennedy on this
issue he did something that is I think
is pretty much unprecedented okay he
essentially told Burke Marshall and
Bobby Kennedy okay that we're going to
do something about this and I want to
make it a very high priority all right I
don't want those kids to be out of
school any longer so Bobby Kennedy went
to a friend of his
William vanden Heuvel right and he told
them we're going to start up a school
district from scratch
in Prince Edward you believe that that's
what he did
so vanden Heuvel went around he went to
these foundations he raised 1.2 million
dollars okay and that's what they did
he stole school system from grade school
to high school from scratch all right
and also something else that Eisenhower
did not do his entire term of office two
terms the Justice Department joined the
lawsuit by the n-double-a-cp
against Prince Edward not as a friend of
the court what they call amicus curiae
but as a plaintiff all right
in other words they were actually going
to join and they were actually going to
present evidence they were actually
going to bring bring their own lawyers
in the court etc all right now the same
thing happens in New Orleans the New
Orleans school district has pretty much
the same reaction to Brown versus Board
as Virginia and so they began to make
all these excuses and all these schemes
to find a way not to have integrated
schools in the south but then finally
judge Skelly right ordered integration
to proceed in September of 1960 and so
now what happens is a state legislature
passed laws circumventing rights order
the eyes within what does the Eisenhower
administration do they say judge Wright
do not overrule these state laws until
after the election right because they
didn't want to deal with another Little
Rock well Eisenhower was still in office
right so now because Wright didn't do
anything for a while the state
legislature passed laws to oust school
board members and the even fired
teachers
who agreed to work with black American
students do you believe this stuff you
know the thing is it wasn't that I you
know I was still alive I was alive back
then I didn't know this stuff was going
on
all right well right of course then when
I had instruct those down all right and
then he asked for federal marshals to
escort the african-american students to
their new schools so what happens next
they do the same thing in New Orleans at
Orval Faubus and the Caucasian parents
did in Little Rock they yanked all the
white kids out of the schools and so
there's a famous case and we have the
picture here Ruby Bridges was a young
she was in grammar school she was
literally the only student in the whole
school
there's something like dirty teachers
she was the only student in the whole
school
all right an incredible photograph I'll
put it in the in the slide yeah yeah and
the reason they he needed marshals is I
have the other photograph look what's
happening across the street you needed
policemen you know because there were
that many violent demonstrators there
all right so as in Virginia now the
legislature threatens to close down the
schools and they began to withhold funds
all right
so now Skelly right calls Burke Marshall
and Burke Marshall tells Bobby Kennedy
about the problem and the Attorney
General famously replied you know sort
of like Malcolm X quote will have to do
whatever is necessary unquote and so
again the Kennedy administration does
something that Eisenhower never did and
I don't think ever contemplated the
doing okay in February of nineteen sixty
one and remember David this is less than
a month after JFK's inauguration less
than a month so these people who say JFK
Donald this is a bunch of baloney are
right on the first day he's going
affirmative action in the second month
you know he's going ahead and Burke
Marshall
now announces he's going to be filing
charges against the state Secretary of
Education shall be Jackson in other
words he's going to indict this guy all
right and so Marshalls aim was to block
the attempt by the governor that cut off
funding for integrated schools right set
a trial date to begin the proceedings
against the secretary for contempt of
court and Jackson backed off
you know discretion a better part of
valor and said he would not interfere
any longer and he avoided a prison
sentence by pleading had a weak heart
okay now in almost none of these books
that I'm reviewing here this includes
Steven Levinson's book Kennedy and King
David Margolick spoke to promise in the
dream and what truth sounds like by
Michael Dyson I couldn't I don't
remember any mention of those in those
three books of this case I think it's a
very important demonstration that number
one King was not the focus of civil
right because the Kennedys it is on
their own okay and on top of that um
they did not have to wait there was no
pleading or anything this is right out
the gate
alright see they they knew what they
were gonna do all right the the the
minute they got into the White House on
the issue it's not like they were alien
to it or anything like that right all
right so then Bobby Kennedy goes to the
University of Georgia law day on May the
6th 1961 the first time anybody can
remember that an attorney general ever
went into the south
alright and address the civil rights
issue and he was very he wanted to do
this because he very much appreciated
that this had been done to the efforts
of the Fifth Circuit Court in the south
all right which we'll get to how
important they are later any
and half is a dress talking about civil
rights we have a link to it here in my
article and these are just as these
early moves are essentially fulfillment
of JFK's promise that unlike what these
guys right
Kennedy did address a civil rights issue
in the 1960 election all right and I
have an excerpt here from one speech
that he did November the 1st 1960 in LA
and he compared his record on that issue
versus Nixon's record on the issue you
know and this was essentially him saying
that if you elect me things are going to
change we're not going to do what
Eisenhower Nixon did so the next thing
that happens is that Bobby Kennedy then
petitions the Interstate Commerce
Commission as a result of the Freedom
Rides earlier that year and to implement
the Supreme Court decision to go ahead
and integrate the interstate busing and
terminals and by about the end of the
next year this was done okay by the end
of the next year it was done okay
there's another blow against Jim Crow
now African American people can board
buses anywhere they want to and go
anywhere they want to and not be
segregated at bus terminals all right
now another thing that Kennedy's wanted
to do is that they wanted to go ahead
and and this is very relevant for today
they wanted to go ahead and files
lawsuits in court based on voting
discrimination in fact on the day Bobby
Kennedy was confirmed as Attorney
General James Eastland and Mississippi
reminded him that the previous
administration had never filed a voting
rights lawsuit in Mississippi in eight
years you know which is true a little
bit of an
because the Eisenhower administration
only filed 10 voting discriminating
lawsuits in eight years and two of those
were on the last day so if you exclude
those they didn't want a year and then
after he was confirmed
JFK writes him a note saying quote get
the roadmaps
and go unquote now again this is just a
few weeks after being inaugurated all
right all right so then that meant of
course get your lawyers together start
going ahead and the backwoods and
valleys of the south and start filing
get the information and start filing the
lawsuits in one year Bobby can be double
the amount of lawyers in the Civil
Rights section in that one year he
doubled the amount I must say this very
slowly and clearly he doubled the amount
of cases that Eisenhower had filed in to
full terms okay by 1963 the number of
attorneys in the civil rights section
had quintupled all right he then hired
18 legal interns to search the microfilm
records in every suspect district and
just that opened up 61 new
investigations in one year all right
prior to JFK it's very clear the brown
decision nor the strictures of the Civil
Rights Commission were being obeyed and
to increase the tempo Bobby Kennedy went
from suing districts and counties to
filing against entire states or regions
of states all right and but JFK was very
interested in this and so Bobby Kennedy
sent him reports every month and then he
sent him a yearly report at the bottom
of 1960 to report JFK will keep pushing
these cases but the price one of the big
problems was because of what happened
before because Eisenhower and Nixon done
next to nothing you know it had created
a very big heel
to climb so when John Doerr a very
famous civil rights lawyer attempted to
interview people in Tennessee he found
that in 13 counties
not one single black American was
registered to vote all right and to [ __ ]
and so he he tried to talk to these
people but then some of the people he
talked to to show how bad these people
were in this out within evicted from
their lands as tenant farmers and sodor
had to call up Bobby Kennedy Bobby
Kennedy calls a white house and then JFK
has to organize an effort to send aid to
those people who've been evicted that's
how bad it was and and and I blame the
previous administrations on this you
know now another thing that they tried
to do was something called a voter
registration drive all right which again
this has never been done before
all right it was a big job because give
you another example in East Carroll in
Northeast Louisiana there were more
African Americans of voting age and
whites but there were two thousand four
hundred eighty five wides registered to
vote and not one single African American
we said I get two thousand eight hundred
and forty five whites and not one single
African America even though there were
more black Americans and white Americans
in that County that's how bad it was all
right in another parish in Louisiana in
Bienville almost every single white
voter is registered of over four
thousand African Americans twenty-five
twenty-five were registered all right
now the problem is that to send this is
expensive because you got to send people
out and this terribly hot weather in the
south they have to knock on doors they
have to collect information you know and
it's not an easy job to do so what
happened is that the Kennedy sent Burke
chillin Harris Wofford who was a civil
rights assistant to foundations in the
north to get the money they ended up
collecting eight hundred and seventy
thousand dollars which would be out
seven million today
and and they parceled it out to the
n-double-a-cp
core and the SCLC and they called out
the voter education project and it
lasted until 1964 you know as one
commentator noted it gained an increase
in its short duration that would have
taken ten years to achieve
under normal conditions and it moved the
whole question of Negro voter
registration off dead center where it
had been for a decade it established
momentum all right if you can believe it
RFK actually got the FBI to help in
these cases which had to be really
terrible thing for J Edgar Hoover it's
not unlike doing it alright and so they
did a lot of this extensive research and
voting rights abuses and then they
presented it to the judges of the Fifth
Circuit okay now this is this is an
issue the fifth circuit that these books
do not mention that's how bad they are
see the Fifth Circuit Court this was how
unusual it was the majority of judges on
that court believed in the Brown versus
Board decision and they believed that
African America should have equal rights
which is very unusual okay I think there
were nine judges on that circuit nine or
eleven and I think about six or seven of
them believed in what Bobby Kennedy was
doing and what JFK was doing and so with
that court in alliance with him all
right they began to present the evidence
for this voting discrimination okay in
the south and incredibly they started
winning Oh kick with the with the help
of the judge minor wisdom Bobby Kennedy
got the
during tests for interpretation the
constitution thrown out in one third of
the entire state of Louisiana all right
in one case it was Frank Johnson another
judge who actually made the cover of
Time magazine when we have that picture
up here and who had worked at Bobby
Kenny on the Freedom Riders case who
gave him his first win in a voting
rights case and with that decision the
number of registered african-american
voters went from 13% to 42% in Macon
County Alabama as judge Johnson later
said to his biographer the Macon County
case was the one that began to Road
southern voting discrimination the
Middle District of Alabama federal court
took the lead in voting rights and the
Fifth Circuit the Supreme Court upheld
those rulings when the Selma
demonstrations began in 1965 the black
citizens in my section the state of
Alabama had already won the right to
vote all right
so using the Fifth Circuit Bobby Kennedy
had planned on eradicating the problem
by 1968 the Selma demonstration you know
hurried it up a lot by about three years
because it then became the Voting Rights
Act of 1965 all right now Bobby Kennedy
and JFK tried to get a voting rights
bill through Congress in 1962 now you
can believe this but it's true
Eisenhower called a press conference and
labeled their modest proposal for voting
rights quote unconstitutional you
believe that in 1962 after his
presidency he wasn't even president
anymore yeah because the press
conferences said giving black people the
right to vote is unconstitutional well
he didn't say that of course but he said
the act was unconstitutional all right
that's what I mean I completely
reevaluated Eisenhower after doing the
research and by the way I don't think I
mentioned this but he tried to talk Earl
Warren
out of ruling for the defendants in the
Brown versus Board case isn't that
incredible
alright okay now but in 62 when they try
to get this thing through they couldn't
break the southern filibuster it was
still too strong but it did help inspire
the 1962 effort to start a poll tax
amendment and the 24th amendment
outlawing the poll tax was ratified in
January of 1964 all right so that's what
that accomplished it eliminated the poll
tax all right now what happens next is
that JFK now begins to consult with his
buddy John Kenneth Galbraith and it says
you know you know I think what we should
do is make it a point that we're not
going to join any in segregated clubs in
the area so he got John Kenneth
Galbraith to sponsor him out to
exclusive clubs in the area all right
and the Metropolitan and a cosmos club
and then JFK withdrew his membership
application when they would not wait on
African American people he then called a
press conference and announced that
neither he nor any members
administration would attend functions at
segregated facilities
all right so both those clubs then
integrated and then members of his
administration started a new club okay
nondiscriminatory called a federal City
Club all right now Harry Truman could
not continue the fe PP the fair
employment practices committee which was
set up during World War two in order to
make sure that as I mentioned earlier
that all of these contracting agencies
with the federal government or hiring
under non discriminatory methods well
Kennedy started something called the
Cee oh okay and that was pretty much the
same thing Committee on Equal Employment
Opportunity and that ended up being
pretty effective and Bobby Kennedy filed
a couple of lawsuits and including
against Lockheed and that was a very big
employer in Georgia and so he made them
go ahead and integrate and this
eventually turned into a permanent part
of the government the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission which is still
around so in other words Kennedy did
what Harry Truman could not do and what
Eisenhower and Nixon simply were not
interested in by getting the federal
government on board with that all right
now some people say that well like for
example Paul Street clashed with
Kennedy's a couple of times
the Kennedys did not protect civil
rights workers in the south alright so
this was an issue that Burke Marshall
Kenny's assistant who got sick and tired
of hearing this actually wrote a book
about in 1964
it's called federalism and civil rights
and he got tired of explaining the
people the United States does not have a
federal police force the FBI is an
investigatory it's about 90% of its
power is an investigatory okay and so
the federal government cannot go in and
arrest people like Bull Connor okay
especially in 1963 because in 1963 Bull
Connor was actually obeying the laws of
Birmingham on the local and state level
so I what on what pretense can I go in
and do something like that all right
okay and so there is an exception to the
law though
as karna Brauer in his fine book John F
Kennedy a second the second
reconstruction knows that when there is
it's when there is it's called the
insurrection law when there is a general
breakdown in civil order all right
then you'll have the right to do it and
so that's what JFK did boxing Bobby
Kennedy did it during the Freedom Riders
demonstration and as you'll see JFK is
going to utilize that in the or miss
riot okay but as every legal scholar has
noted it's not something that people
should be the government should use as a
permanent device if something from as
Alexander Bickel said you know we should
actually coil from because the
destructive of a free society in other
words we don't want a Gestapo in the
United States all right all right and so
that explains away that now as I
mentioned earlier Kennedy managed to
integrate some private universities in
the south by withdrawing funds from them
and then he managed to get Clemson and
South Carolina integrated peacefully
also so that was another blow against
Jim Crow all right and so but the
University of Mississippi presented a
very serious problem james Meredith
famously applied there today after JFK's
inauguration well they were did not to
put it mildly they didn't want him to
come all right and so when they
overruled his application the Fifth
Circuit stepped in and overruled the
trustees then the trustees went ahead
and turned over authority did the
governor of the state Ross Barnett
so JFK now sees there's going to be some
problems and he begins to arrange a
force of federal federal marshals and
Regular Army true
Millington airbase in Memphis what to
make a long story short Ross Barnett
ended up double-crossing the White House
and his stalling tactics allowed a group
variously estimated from two to three
thousand demonstrators on the campus and
he deliberately pulled the police force
there before Nicholas Katzenbach got
there with Meredith on a Sunday night
there's also register him on a Monday
morning and what happened of course was
the famous general Walker lead some
people call it an insurrection because
the federal marshals were outnumbered by
the demonstrators Burke Marshall scene
and I think 600 marshals and like I said
they were between two and three thousand
demonstrators and ended up being a mess
and attaching backs communication
network broke down you can believe it he
had to run to a payphone to start
calling came outside a doctor stranger
call the White House on a payphone you
know and so and so the army didn't get
there - something like two or three
hours after they were scheduled to be
there so it ended up being a real mess
you know you had two people killed
scores of marshals were injured 13 men
were indicted along all right
and so President Kennedy was so worried
about this that the entire time Meredith
was at the University of Mississippi he
had two security guards escorting him to
and from class and guarding his dorm
room use determined that nothing was
going to happen in this guy now at the
University of Alabama in 63 things went
smoother all right and this was the
famous confrontation between George
Wallace and Nicholas katzenback and
there's actually films of this all right
and unlike what some people say you know
like some very questionable riders on
the Kenny's the Kennedy administration
all right
have said that this was supposedly you
know a like Evan Thomas for example but
this is a completely choreographed event
it was not because Bobby Kennedy had
tried to talk to Wallace he actually
went down to the governor's mansion and
they got no headway
President Kennedy tried to talk to
Wallace got nowhere all right they
didn't know what he was going to do and
so what happens is that Judge Seaborn
Lim was another friend of Frank
Johnson's on this his circuit wrote an
order that two african-american students
were to enter the university right
Wallace assembled a force of 895 state
troopers and police to back him so JFK
sand in 3,000 troops this time they were
only just a few minutes away all right
so Bobby Kennedy that there's a famous
film by Robert drew called crisis in
which they record the meetings of this
in the White House see Bobby Kennedy
thought that they might have to force
the students to the front door he said
there's a far end or he says during the
movie that we might be able to shove the
kids through away from Wallace to get
him in all right well thank God it
didn't happen because I think according
to Andrew Cohen's book two days in June
which is a kind of micro analysis of the
whole thing all right katzenback and
Wallace finally came to an agreement
that morning okay that morning all right
you know why by the way because the
judge Seabourn limb had threatened to
indict Wallace if he blocked the entry
of the kids into the school all right
that's what I mean that's why they were
so important mm-hmm all right
okay so that evening once the kids are
admitted
President Kennedy of course gave what
many people believe to be the finest
speech given on civil rights since
Abraham Lincoln all right but if you
couldn't believe it that wasn't the end
of George Wallace see Judge Frank
Johnson had written in order for three
high schools in North Alabama to be
integrated with a number of African
American students all right
on that day they were supposed to go to
class the state troopers arrived
awaiting them block their entry and
Wallace sent a message is superintendent
that the school would not open that day
you believe this guy
Bobby Kennedy now convenes he goes to
the Fifth Circuit Court all right
convenes a five man panel to issue a
restraining order stopping Wallace from
interfering with the integration of the
schools Wallace tries to get around a
restraining order by now saying the
National Guard to stop their students
from entering that afternoon JFK ordered
the National for the state National
Guard to be nationalized that is placed
under control and finally the kids were
allowed to go to school it is some
really bizarre stuff look at something
uh oh it's totally bizarre too you know
these are just people trying to go to
school it's a we see a lot of strange
stuff happening now but thank God none
of it is is this crazy but what kind of
you talked a couple times about you know
the Kennedys were going to try to indict
you know that the governor of the Board
of Education and then Wallace was this
kind of using the 14th amendment to to
charge them what kind of laws were they
trying to use to to bring these guys to
order yeah yeah that's what they were
going to use they were going to use the
Civil War amendments okay to bring them
up on charges of being in contempt of
court because that's what the Fifth
Circuit was using to open up these
schools
was was a Civil War amendments to these
guys they were not going to pay any
attention to those the Supreme Court
decisions that tried to eliminate okay
the which we talked about in the first
part okay to them the amendments because
they were actually part of the
Constitution took priority right all
right
and that's what they were going to use
all right in order to get them indicted
for trying to obstruct justice oh okay
now in addition to relying upon those
Civil War amendments the other thing
that the Fifth Circuit relied upon for
their rulings was the Brown versus Board
case of 1954 you know and they tried to
apply that as liberally as they could
and to stretch it as far as they could
all right so the combination of that
superseding decision which eclipsed
Plessy versus Ferguson in 1896 that
allowed them to prioritize and go back
to the to the Civil War amendments 13 14
and 15 and then begin to rule in favor
of what Bobby Kennedy wanted them by the
way it should add Bobby Kennedy actually
met Frank Johnson on two occasions once
in Washington and then down there in
Alabama so they were friends you know on
more than just a professional level okay
so these were basically some one group
like the n-double-a-cp would sue these
southern states and then the courts
would rule you know yes you have to
abide by this suit and then once they
failed it was a contempt of court kind
of thing yes see what would usually
happen is that Bobby Kennedy would lose
in the district court but then he'd go
to the Circuit of Appeals and he'd win
in the Circuit of Appeals the Fifth
Circuit and then the Warren Court would
like 80% of the time they would back up
the Fifth Circuit
and he would go ahead and be able to
either press forward and what he wanted
to do or if he wanted to go ahead and
file contempt charges he could do that
also
okay no it's interesting to see how how
that actually works the mechanics of it
all right now okay at the end of 62 gfk
issued his executive order to integrate
housing but because it was an executive
order it was limited it wasn't an act of
Congress so I think if I remember
correctly it only applied to about 15 or
20% of the homes being constructed or
remortgaged at that time all right and
which relates to another criticism of
JFK made by Taylor branch the
biographers of King that King wanted him
to issue an order to strike down
segregation in the south well on this
issue I got in contact with Professor
Erlin Sherman insky who was the Dean at
Cal Berkeley law school and I asked him
about this could Kennedy have done it
and he said well he could have but it
would have only applied to the executive
branch of government it will you know it
wouldn't have applied to private
businesses or even state and local
governments and since Kennedy was
already doing that you know due to
affirmative action you know that that
criticism is completely unfounded
now Kennedy does submit an omnibus civil
rights bill in February of 1963 all
right and he made an address upon its
issuance you know citing that you know
this is the right thing to do there's a
moral dimension to that speech he gave
which we've linked to here and what
happened was that for the first time
this bill had a chance to make it
through because of several events that
made the whole civil rights issue front
page news and that of course was the
Birmingham demonstrations plus Kennedy's
face off of George Wallace
at the University of Alabama all right
now dick at Birmingham by the way
Birmingham was not as most people think
that wasn't King's idea and neither was
at the SCLC's idea one of the things I
tried to do in this series of essays was
to show that this whole thing was a much
more complex phenomenon than most people
you know the media and the academia
trying like you know boil it down to one
or three or one two or three people or
two it was much more complex than that
see Fred Shuttlesworth was the guy who
started those demonstrations right and
he had to push the this SCLC Kings group
into joining him and it was james Bevel
another guy who gets almost no credit
you know who provided the brilliant
stroke that turned that around because
by the beginning of May right the the
thing was dying down King couldn't get
enough people in the streets so bevel
thought of the idea of getting little
children all right and while King was
out of town he rehearsed the kids and he
told them that I'm going to be on the
radio on May the second I'll issue a
cold Ward you listen for that cold word
when the cold word gets broadcast you
begin to march out of the church and
that's how it happened it was really
james Bevel who's a brilliant idea all
right and so that's how you got of
course you know everybody's familiar
with the famous pictures of the fire
department with those high powered hoses
you know knocking little kids off the
wall and you know rabid German Shepherd
dogs you know going after men women and
children in the streets of Birmingham
and so after this
and day of this the CEO of the local
newspaper Vincent Townsend calls a
friend of his at the sheriff's office
and says call the Justice Department we
need to get Burke Marshall down here
this is enough and so that's what
started the settlement
okay now JFK and RFK now decided this is
the moment for us to really go ahead and
eliminate Jim Crow in the south all
right
and in fact JFK called up Dick Gregory
the famous comedian you just passed away
a few months ago right you know recently
yeah yeah just a few months ago and and
so and he said dick I didn't know
everything that happened in Birmingham
you know I'm probably not getting the
full story from these news reports and
so Gregory told them you know and he
said the whole thing it's about 10 12
minutes and JFK said to Gregory
when he was done he said we got those
bastards now all right and this is when
he decided to overhaul the bill making
it much stronger and then he begins a
tremendous lobbying effort for about one
month between May and June he flew in
all of these local power centers from
different cities in different states you
know mayors governors lawyers business
leaders and most important of all clergy
right and when it was all over JFK had
brought in about 1600 people and those
people created spin-off groups back home
and it was that spinoff group according
to Richard Russell who was running one
of the three people running this
southern filibuster that broke it open
he said you know we've been able to hold
the line until all the churches joined
the civil rights lobby in 1964
all right and so that's how the bill
passed all right it was in LBJ that's a
myth you know which the MSM is brought
up you know and Robert Carr was tried to
extend in his crappy book the passage of
power you know and because a guy named
clay Rice and a very good book about
this called the Builder century
he said Johnson might have turned over
one vote okay
and he said King at very little or
nothing to do with it either yeah that's
the most important people or Hubert
Humphrey Bobby Kennedy in the Gina's
Justice Department team most notably
Burke Marshall and Nicholas Johnson back
and the Republican senator Thomas couch
oh all right now the march on Washington
that was the idea of Bayard Rustin and
Phillip Randolph and I think Randolph
wanted to do this because both Roosevelt
and with Truman he had backed down when
he got a few morsels from them you know
like the FPPC and integrating the
military and so he decided to go ahead
and organize this thing for the civil
rights
omnibus civil rights bill and Kennedy
some people have written you know that
somehow cannon and King actually spread
this that somehow Kennedy was against a
demonstration no he wasn't well he was
against was the first draft put together
by Bayard Rustin because that called for
a two day civil disobedience
demonstration centered on Capitol Hill
and on JFK did not think that was a very
good idea
it's too confrontational that's not the
kind of attention you want again and so
Kennedy managed to get about four of his
people including Walter Reuther on the
organizing committee and so that's how
it was evolved to the great great
success that it was okay which I think
everybody would acknowledge that was
probably one
the high points of liberalism you know
post-world War two the great march on
Washington all right
and the reason Kennedy didn't speak at
the demonstration is not that he didn't
want to is that they didn't want him to
speak Bayard Rustin wanted this to be
their time in the Sun he wanted the
accent to be in the civil rights leaders
and so the human came and Roy Wilkins
put together this excuse saying that
they feared for Kennedy's life and then
they would meet him afterwards at the
White House
okay and so that's how that's how that
happened all right now JFK understood
that there was a lot riding on this
civil rights bill and he had now become
a hated in the south
all right but he and his brother and
Humphrey decided that this was going to
be it all right well when the bill first
went up it only has 42 votes not even at
the Senate after it got through the
House of Representatives all right but
through a relentless full-court press
all right and Plus now there began to be
a push by church people on Midwest
Republicans all right they finally
managed to make it through it took one
year to pass a bill and so as I've
written here no president before Kennedy
ever confronted the civil rights issue
as he did nobody was even close and he
did it from literally the very first day
Carl Brower wrote a very good book on
this so what Kennedy did is he picked up
the narrow trail but Truman had tried to
forge and he broadened it into wide
avenues and at the end of this part
three I make a chart showing the
achievements of FDR Truman Eisenhower
and JFK you know Jim Kay has them all
beat you know you know it's it's
basically it's a mismatch that's in heat
and by the way he did it in three years
FDR was in office for 13 Truman for 7
Eisenhower for 8 and JFK you know has
something like seven times as many
achievements in like you know one third
at a time that's so significant it is so
this I hope this is a corrective to what
you know all the baloney this Apple tear
about the Kennedys being slow and not
achieving much in civil rights
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you